# INTRODUCTION ABOUT TIMER IN STM32

**Note:** This introduction Focuses mainly on Timer peripherals which support full common features presented by STM32 manufactorer

## 1. FUNCTIONALITY SUPPORTED BY STM32's TIMER 
[*reference*](https://www.st.com/resource/en/reference_manual/rm0008-stm32f101xx-stm32f102xx-stm32f103xx-stm32f105xx-and-stm32f107xx-advanced-armbased-32bit-mcus-stmicroelectronics.pdf)

STM32 provides The **advanced-control timers** and **general-purpose timers**  which consist of a **16-bit auto-reload counter** driven by a **programmable prescaler**.

It may be used for a variety of purposes: 
- Measuring the pulse lengths of input signals (**input capture**) 
- Generating output waveforms (**output compare, PWM, complementary PWM with dead-time insertion**).

Pulse lengths and waveform periods can be modulated from a few microseconds to several milliseconds using the **timer prescaler** and the **RCC clock controller prescalers**.

The advanced-control (TIM1 and TIM8) and general-purpose (TIMx) timers are completely independent, and do not share any resources. 

Their functionalities could be categorized according to described-above purposes: 

a. Basic functions: 
- 16-bit up, down, up/down *auto-reload* counter.
- 16-bit programmable prescaler allowing dividing (also “on the fly”) the counter clock frequency either by any factor **between 1 and 65536.**

b. Measuring the pulse lengths of input signals 
- Input capture

c. Generating output waveforms 
- Output compare
- PWM generation (Edge and Center-aligned Mode)
- One-pulse mode output
- Complementary outputs with programmable dead-time

d. Advanced feature: 
- Synchronization circuit to control the timer with **external signals** and to **interconnect** several timers together.
- Repetition counter to **update** the timer registers only after a given **number of cycles** of the counter.
- Break input to put the timer’s output signals in **reset state** or in a **known state**.
- Supports incremental (quadrature) encoder and hall-sensor circuitry for positioning purposes
- Trigger input for external clock or cycle-by-cycle current management

e. Exception support:
- Update: counter overflow/underflow, counter initialization (by software or internal/external trigger)
- Trigger event (counter start, stop, initialization or count by internal/external trigger)
- Input capture
- Output compare
- Break input

## 2. HARDWARE DESIGN OF TIMER IN LOW LAYER 

The Time-based unit includes:
- **Counter register (TIMx_CNT)**: 16-bit counter, The counter can count up/down/both. The counter clock can be divided by a prescaler.
- **Prescaler register (TIMx_PSC)**: 
  + The prescaler can divide the counter clock frequency by any factor between 1 and 65536. 
  + It can be changed on the fly as this control register is buffered. The new prescaler ratio is taken into account at the next **update event**.

- **Auto-reload register (TIMx_ARR)**: The auto-reload register is **preloaded**. 
  + Writing to or reading from the **auto-reload register** accesses the **preload register**. 
  + The content of the **preload register** are transferred into the shadow register *permanently* or at each *update event* (UEV) (Depending on the **auto-reload preload enable bit** (ARPE) in TIMx_CR1 register)
  + If the **UDIS** bit equals 0 in the **TIMx_CR1 register**. It can also be generated by software. 

- **Repetition counter register (TIMx_RCR)**

The counter, the auto-reload register and the prescaler register can be written or read by software. This is true even **when the counter is running**

The counter is clocked by the prescaler output CK_CNT, which is enabled only when the **counter enable bit (CEN)** in TIMx_CR1 register is set 

Besides, The Timer unit contains: 
- Control register (TIMx_CR)
- Interrupt enable register (TIMx_DIER)
- Event generation register (TIMx_EGR)

## 4. FUNCTIONALITY BEHAVIOUR OF EACH MODE
### a. Counter modes
#### Upcounting mode: 

The counter counts from 0 to the **auto-reload value** (content of the **TIMx_ARR register**), then restarts from 0 and generates a counter overflow event.

#### Downcounting mode: 
The counter counts from the **auto-reload value** (content of the TIMx_ARR register) down to 0, then restarts from the **auto-reload value** and generates a counter underflow event.

#### Center-aligned mode:
The counter counts from 0 to the **auto-reload value** '''(content of the TIMx_ARR register) – 1''', generates a counter **overflow** event, then counts from the **auto-reload value** down to 1 and generates a counter **underflow** event. Then it restarts counting from 0.

***notes***: Center-aligned mode is active when the **CMS bits** in TIMx_CR1 register > '00'. 
***notes*** In this mode, the DIR direction bit in the TIMx_CR1 register cannot be written. It is updated by hardware and gives the current direction of the counter.

### b. Interrupt/Events
#### Update event
- The **update event** is generated everytime overflow/underflow event occurs. 
- Setting the **UG bit** in the TIMx_EGR register (by software or by using the slave mode controller) also generates an update event.
- If setting the **URS bit** (update request selection) in **TIMx_CR1 register** -> When setting the **UG bit** -> generates an update event **UEV** -> **No generates**  interrupt or DMA request (no setting the **UIF flag**).
> This is to avoid generating both update and capture interrupts when clearing the counter on the capture event.  When an update event occurs, all the registers are updated and the update flag (UIF bit in TIMx_SR register) is set (depending on the URS bit) 

- If setting '1' the **UDIS bit** in the **TIMx_CR1 register**, The UEV event generation will be disabled   
- If resetting '0' the **UDIS bit** in the **TIMx_CR1 register**, the UEV event generation will be enabled  
> This is to avoid updating the shadow registers while writing new values in the preload registers. 

#### Output compare event 
The **Output compare interrupt flag** of channels configured in output is set when: 
- The counter counts down (Center aligned mode 1, CMS = "01"), 
- The counter counts up (Center aligned mode 2, CMS = "10") 
- The counter counts up and down (Center aligned mode 3, CMS = "11").

## 3. HOW TO CONFIGURE A FULLY FUNCTIONED TIMER IN THIS PROJECT

